
## Relational Data Modeling With Postgres

## Table of Contents

- [Introduction](#intro)
- [Description](#describe)
- [Data](#data)
  - [Song Dataset](#song)
  - [Log Dataset](#log_data)
- [Schema for Song Play Analysis](#schema)
  - [Fact Table](#fact)
  - [Dimension Tables](#dim)
- [Files](#files)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

***

<a id="intro"></a>

## Introduction

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on
songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is
particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to.
Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a
**directory of JSON logs** on user activity on the app, as well as a **directory
with JSON metadata** on the songs in their app.

They need a data engineer to create a **Postgres** database with tables designed
to **optimize queries on song play analysis.** My role is to create a **database
schema** and **ETL pipeline** for this analysis. 

<a id="describe"></a>

## Description

In this project, I will apply the concepts of data modeling with Postgres
and ETL pipeline using Python. I will define **fact and dimension tables**
for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline
that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in
Postgres using **Python** and **SQL.**

<a id="data"></a>

## Data

<a id="song"></a>

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song
Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON
format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files
are **partitioned by the first three letters** of each song's track ID. For example,
here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

<pre>
data/song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
data/song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
</pre>


<a id="log_data"></a>

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event
simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the
dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from a music streaming app based
on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset we'll be working with are **partitioned by year and
month.** For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

<pre>
data/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
data/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
</pre>


<a id="schema"></a>

## Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using the song and log datasets, we'll create a star schema optimized for queries
on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

<a id="fact"></a>

### Fact Table

1. **songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays, i.e., records with
  page `NextSong`
    - *songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id,
      location, user_agent*

<a id="dim"></a>

### Dimension Tables

2. **users** - Following information about users:
    - *user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level*

3. **songs** - Following info about songs:
    - *song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration*

4. **artists** - Artists information:
    - *artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude*

5. **time** - timestamps of records in **songplays** broken down into specific units
    - *start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday*

In order to create these tables, I performed some transformation in the data which are already in song_data and log_data directory.

<a id='p_song'></a>


This is what a songs file looks like:

<pre>
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARD7TVE1187B99BFB1", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "California - LA", "artist_name": "Casual", "song_id": "SOMZWCG12A8C13C480", "title": "I Didn't Mean To", "duration": 218.93179, "year": 0}
</pre>

<a id='p_log'></a>

## Files

<pre>
.
├── create_tables.py------# Drops and creates tables. Running this file resets
|                           the tables before each time we run ETL scripts.
├── etl.ipynb-------------# Reads and processes a single file from song_data and
|                           log_data and loads the data into our tables.
├── etl.py----------------# Reads and processes files from song_data and
|                           log_data and loads them into our tables. We'll fill
|                           this based on ETL notebook.
├── sql_queries.py--------# Contains all our SQL queries, and is imported into
                            the last three files above.
</pre>

<a id="sw_reqs"></a>


<a id="conclusion"></a>

## Conclusion

I created a Postgres database from the two JSON directories. I extracted data from two directories, applied transformation, filtering, and then inserting the transformed data into appropriate tables.

This data can now be used for ad-hoc queries, basic aggregation and analytics purposes.
